---
title: "Demystifying ROUTER_LATE"
description: "What is the purpose of the ROUTER_LATE role, and when should it be used?"
slug: demystifying-router-late
authors: erayd
tags: ["Meshtastic", "devices", "roles", "routing", "infrastructure"]
date: 2025-09-25T19:21
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Since the last [guide on choosing the right role][1], a new role -
ROUTER_LATE - has been added. What exactly does this role do, when should it be
used, and how does it fit into the overall picture of how a Meshtastic network
operates?

Meshtastic has a large number of device roles, each designed for a different
purpose. While the default CLIENT is a good start for simpler meshes without
complex obstacles to work around, for larger meshes with more complex routing
needs it's important to select the right role to ensure that the overall mesh
is robust, does not get overloaded, and ensures the reliable transit of packets
to where they need to go.

{/* truncate */}

## What is the purpose of ROUTER_LATE?

ROUTER_LATE is designed as an infrastructure role for serving parts of larger
or more complex meshes that do not have visibility to existing ROUTER sites.
This could be e.g. a cluster of nodes on the other side of a hill, at the
bottom of a canyon, or otherwise blocked by some significant obstacle. It is a
mandatory-rebroadcast role, meaning that it will always rebroadcast any packet
that it hears (provided that the hop limit for that packet has not been
exceeded).

It is intended to be deployed in sites that do not have the very large coverage
footprint typically suited to ROUTER nodes. Sites that are critical for
reliable passage of traffic, but known to not be optimally sited for serving
the overall mesh, should use ROUTER_LATE.

It is *not* intended as a rooftop node to extend the range of devices inside
your house. Using it in this manner may be great for *you*, but because
ROUTER_LATE will rebroadcast every single packet that it can, it can add
significantly to the overall airtime use in your area. Too much of this can
rapidly lead to a degraded or unusable mesh due to congestion, which causes
collisions and packet loss. Please refrain from using infrastructure roles in
locations where they are not genuinely warranted, especially on meshes that use
a slower modulation (e.g. LONG_FAST).

If you need a rooftop node for some reason, please look into the new
CLIENT_BASE role, which is designed for that purpose.

## Rebroadcast timing, and how ROUTER_LATE works

Due to the extremely limited bandwidth available, Meshtastic networks do not
utilise complex routing algorithms that rely on additional communication
between nodes. There is no equivalent to protocols such as OSPF, BGP etc. from
the IP networking world (see [here][2] for why). Instead, Meshtastic uses a
combination of role selection, random delays, and timing based on the signal
strength of a received packet to ensure that any given packet will be more
likely to take a more efficient path across the network, while minimising
unnecessary rebroadcasts that can add to congestion on the single frequency
that is shared by the entire mesh.

Any packet that is received with a remaining hop limit greater than zero is
eligible for rebroadcast. Packets with a hop limit of zero are discarded after
processing, and are not rebroadcast at all.

### Contention Windows

Meshtastic has three different 'contention windows' in which a packet may be
sent. These windows can be best thought of as slices of time since the packet
was received. They do not overlap.

| Window  | Duration   | Roles                          | Description                                                                                                                                                    |
|---------|------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Early   | Very short | ROUTER, REPEATER, CLIENT_BASE* | The first timeslot in which packets may be rebroadcast. Preempts other rebroadcasting, and can cause non-infrastructure roles to cancel their own rebroadcast. |
| Default | Normal     | All non-early roles            | The second timeslot, in which all rebroadcasts take place by default unless a node is using a specific role which causes it to use another window.             |
| Late    | Normal     | ROUTER_LATE                    | The final timeslot, in which ROUTER_LATE will rebroadcast if it hears another node rebroadcasting the packet before it.                                        |

With the exception of ROUTER_LATE, all roles will only perform rebroadcasting
within the window to which their role relates. ROUTER_LATE is a special case:
under normal circumstances, it will behave identically to a CLIENT, and will
attempt to rebroadcast within the default contention window, using the same
timing behaviour as CLIENT. However, if it hears another node rebroadcasting
the packet first (in *any* prior window), then it will defer its own
rebroadcast of that packet to the late contention window instead. Within that
late window, it will still use the same timing behaviour as CLIENT.

This has the effect of ensuring that ROUTER_LATE will politely 'give way' to
other nodes, thereby preserving the normal routing behaviour of the mesh. Other
than the obviously higher airtime used, the impact of deploying a ROUTER_LATE
node is identical to as if a CLIENT were deployed at that location.

*CLIENT_BASE will only rebroadcast in the early window if the packet is to or
from a favourite node. In all other situations, it will behave the same as a
regular CLIENT, and use the normal window.

### Random timing and SNR bias

Within each contention window, a random delay is added before rebroadcasting a
packet. That delay is then modified based on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of
the packet when it was received, with packets having a worse SNR (which
typically corresponds to a worse or more distant link) ending up with a shorter
delay, and high quality signals having a longer delay.

The purpose of this is to ensure that, when a packet is heard by multiple other
nodes, they mostly do not try to transmit at the same time, and that nodes
which are further away are given 'first dibs' at rebroadcasting. While SNR is
not an ideal proxy for distance, it does have a rough correlation, and will
result - on average - in packets travelling further with each hop than they
would using random timing alone.

### Rebroadcast cancellation / move to late contention window

In order to ensure that the single, shared frequency is not overloaded, all
roles other than ROUTER, REPEATER, and ROUTER_LATE (and CLIENT_BASE when the
packet is to or from a favourite node) will cancel rebroadcasting and discard
the packet if they hear another node rebroadcasting it.

ROUTER_LATE will, instead of cancelling its rebroadcast, defer it to the late
contention window if it hears another node rebroadcasting the packet.

### When packets are dropped

While ROUTER_LATE will normally rebroadcast everything it hears, there are some
specific exceptions:

1. If the packet arrives with a hop limit of zero. These packets are considered to have reached the end of the line, and are not supposed to be passed on any further.
2. If the TX (transmit) queue is full, and another packet arrives that is both eligible for rebroadcast, and has a higher priority than the lowest-priority packet in the TX queue, then the lowest-priority packet in the queue is discarded. This typically happens on busy meshes, or meshes that use a slower modulation configuration. ROUTER_LATE is particularly prone to this, because it stores deferred packets in the TX queue while waiting for the opportunity to transmit them during the late contention window.

## Frequently asked questions

### Why can't I use this on my roof?

Because ROUTER_LATE tries to rebroadcast everything it hears, it adds a notable
amount of traffic to the single, shared frequency used by the mesh. This can
cause problematic congestion, collisions, and lost packets. If the overall
traffic volume gets too high, it can significantly impact the performance of
the mesh, sometimes to the point of rendering it unusable.

If you insist on using this role as a roof node *anyway*, then please closely
monitor the ChUtil (shared airtime use) and AirTXUtil (airtime used by just
this node) stats on your node. If ChUtil gets higher than 25%, or AirUtilTX
higher than around 7-8%, please cease using this role in order to preserve
overall functionality of the mesh.

Please note that ROUTER and REPEATER are also unsuitable for rooftop use (in
fact, even more so because they preempt other nodes). These roles are intended
for very well-sited infrastructure only.

### Why did my packet go via a regular CLIENT, instead of the ROUTER_LATE node?

Because ROUTER_LATE is a 'polite' rebroadcaster, if another CLIENT node is more
favourably located at that particular point in time, or simply wins the random
timing race, it may rebroadcast the packet first. The ROUTER_LATE will still
rebroadcast, but you may not notice, as the packet may have already arrived at
its destination via another path first.

### Why did my packet go via a ROUTER or REPEATER node, instead of the ROUTER_LATE one in my area?

ROUTER and REPEATER nodes preempt all other roles for rebroadcasting. If there
is one in range, packets will go via that node before anything else. If ROUTER
or REPEATER nodes are deployed in suboptimal locations, this can result in hop
limits being reached prematurely.

### Why can't I see the ROUTER_LATE node in my traceroute result?

See the two above answers.

### Why is traffic via a ROUTER_LATE node slow?

Because ROUTER_LATE will defer rebroadcasting packets if it hears another node
rebroadcasting them first, this can result in additional delays. This is
particularly noticeable on slower modulation settings (e.g. LONG_FAST), where
such delays can become quite substantial.

### Why is traffic that should go via a ROUTER_LATE node going missing?

The shared frequency used by the mesh in your area is likely busy, and as a
result the ROUTER_LATE is dropping low-priority packets when its transmit queue
is full.

Note that some operations on the mesh can generate a large number of packets in
a very short space of time, so the queue can easily go from empty to full in
the space of just a few seconds.

### I run a ROUTER or REPEATER in a suboptimal location. Should I change it to ROUTER_LATE?

If your node *must* rebroadcast in order for nodes within its coverage area to
communicate with the rest of the mesh properly, then use ROUTER_LATE. If this
is a rooftop node, please use CLIENT_BASE or CLIENT instead.

### My node is the only ROUTER around, but it isn't at 10,000ft altitude. Should I change it to ROUTER_LATE?

If your node's coverage footprint is genuinely excellent, please keep it as
ROUTER. ROUTER will preempt all other roles, and is effectively asserting that
it is the best path for all traffic within range.

Please note that ROUTER and REPEATER nodes will cause all rebroadcast roles
other than ROUTER, REPEATER, ROUTER_LATE and CLIENT_BASE (for packets to / from
favourite nodes only) within their coverage area to cancel their own
rebroadcasts - so only deploy ROUTER nodes in locations that are *actually*
properly suited to that behaviour.

### My node in $LOCATION can receive, but nobody hears me when I transmit. Should I deploy a ROUTER_LATE to help?

No. In this case, please deploy a CLIENT node nearby. This node will
rebroadcast all packets from those nodes which have not made it out via another
path, but will not unnecessarily consume airtime by repeating packets that
those clients can already hear just fine.

This scenario is quite common for devices with a compromised internal antenna
(e.g. T1000-E).

### Should I put a ROUTER_LATE on my vehicle?

In most situations, no. However it can occasionally be appropriate if your
vehicle is serving as a relay for e.g. a hiking party that cannot see the rest
of the mesh otherwise, and you need to deploy temporary infrastructure coverage
for the area in which they are hiking.

If you do deploy a ROUTER_LATE on your vehicle for such a purpose, please
remember to switch it back to a more appropriate role after your temporary
activity is done.

If you wish to have a rebroadcasting node on your vehicle specifically to serve
your own node while you are inside nearby buildings, please use CLIENT (if you
can receive but not transmit) or CLIENT_BASE (if your node needs assistance in
both directions).

### Will a ROUTER_LATE permanently installed on my vehicle help the mesh?

No. Please don't do this - ROUTER_LATE is not intended as a mobile role, and
using it in that manner will usually cause more problems than it solves.


[1]: /blog/choosing-the-right-device-role/
[2]: /blog/why-meshtastic-uses-managed-flood-routing/
